GroundWork Monitor Open Source 5.1.x is free software; you can 
redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public 
License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, 
or (at your option) any later version. GroundWork Monitor Open Source is 
distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY 
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY 
or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General 
Public License for more details

GroundWork Monitor Open Source 5.1.3 Release Notes

PURPOSE
The purpose of this document is to outline new features in GroundWork 
Monitor Open Source 5.1.x. 

DISTRIBUTION NOTES
In addition to this Release Notes document, please read the Readme and 
Installation Guide which accompany this release. These documents 
contain important information regarding bug fixes, known issues, and new 
installation and upgrading instructions.

SUPPORT
Product support is available through a GroundWork subscription 
agreement. For more information, go to GroundWork Support at 
http://www.groundworkopensource.com/support/options.html.

CONTENTS
SECTION 1 - WHAT'S NEW IN GROUNDWORK MONITOR OPEN SOURCE 5.1.x
SECTION 2 - BEHAVIOR THAT HAS CHANGED IN VERSION 5.1.0
SECTION 3 - BEHAVIOR THAT HAS CHANGED IN VERSION 5.1.3

--------------------
SECTION 1 - WHAT'S NEW IN GROUNDWORK MONITOR OPEN SOURCE 5.1.x
--------------------
GroundWork Monitor Open Source is designed to provide 
centralized visibility and control over your entire IT infrastructure. It 
monitors systems, applications, databases, and network 
equipment. GroundWork Monitor Open Source features a flexible 
architecture that supports custom configurations and custom 
reporting. The system is built on a modern architecture that 
combines the best of open source with innovative software 
developed by GroundWork's IT management experts for 
monitoring and managing your network availability and 
performance. New features in this version include:

New Functionality:
- Now includes GroundWork Foundation
A high performance IT management data abstraction layer 
and development platform (the same one integrated into 
GroundWork Monitor Professional). 
The Foundation data model allows the integration of any state, 
event, and performance data, independent of the Monitoring 
Application that produces it.
Uses MySQL 5.0 as the back-end database..

- Performance Graphing (RRDtool integration)
Allows you to create groups of hosts or services that you want 
to see in performance reports. Any combination of 
performance graphs can be customized and saved as reports 
for repeated viewing with constantly updated data.
With a more complete implementation of web services at the 
data retrieval level, all screens that access data from the 
Foundation database are more responsive

- Straightforward upgrade from GWMOS 5.1.x to GWMPRO 5.1.x:
Preserves stored monitoring data, since the persistent store is 
now the same between both products
Performance Improvements:

- We are seeing performance increases of 2x to 5x for data 
intensive screens.  In almost all cases the screens refresh 
within a couple of seconds.

- The improved Status Viewer allows users to quickly navigate 
to the information of interest, with fewer clicks, and a cleaner 
interface.

- With a more complete implementation of web services at the 
data retrieval level, all screens that access data from the 
Foundation database are more responsive.  

Scalability:
- The product scales to 15 concurrent users, maintaining 
acceptable performance.

- Support for 500 hosts per monitoring server

- Support for 500 service checks per minute (5000 service 
checks total)

- Support for 6 child servers (total of 3000 hosts, 3000 service 
checks/minute)

Enhanced Status Viewer:
Optimized Display
- Eliminates redundant clicks to get to pertinent information 

- More efficiently structured to handle large datasets 

- More efficiently retrieves data and less memory required per user 

- Faster display by only retrieving visible information 

Host Search on all pages:
- Tree Navigation on all pages
Navigate and expand tree to see status of all host groups, 
hosts and services 

- Pie charts to better visualize system state 

- Dual pane TroubleView 
Independent scrolling of hosts and services 
Bar graph indicates overall health of hosts and services 
Additional supported configurations:

- Seamless upgrade from GroundWork Monitor Open Source 
5.1.x to GroundWork Monitor Professional 5.1.x
With version 5.1.x, the persistent data store is the same 
between the two products providing a seamless upgrade from 
Open Source to Professional.

- Support for SSL
Our new Configuration Guide documents how to set-up SSL 
with GroundWork Monitor Open Source

- Support for LDAP
Our new Configuration Guide documents how to integrate 
LDAP with GroundWork Monitor Open Source

--------------------
SECTION 2 - BEHAVIOR THAT HAS CHANGED IN VERSION 5.1.0
--------------------
- Logic used to determine Pending status for services
In GroundWork Monitor Open Source 5.0 there was an 
inconsistency between how Nagios and GroundWork Monitor 
determined which services are "pending".  The logic that 
Nagios uses (and GroundWork has adopted for version 5.1.0):
For either passive or active checks, look at the following fields 
in the status.log:
If both the "has been checked" and "last checked" field are "0", 
then the service should be shown as "pending"
If either the "has been checked" field is "1", or "last checked" 
is non-zero, then use the "current status" field to determine the 
service's status.

- Pending status in TroubleView
In the 5.0 version of the product, services that were in a 
pending state were shown in TroubleView.  With release 5.1.0, 
that is no longer the case.  This change was made because 
many of our customers have passive checks that may remain 
in a pending state for long periods of time, and consequently 
these services are not considered to be in trouble.

- FilterView has been removed from Status Viewer
With the Dashboard feature added in version 5.0, the 
functionality that FilterView provided can more easily be 
satisfied through dashboards.  With the enhanced Status 
Viewer, the FilterView has been removed.

- Default polling time changed from 5 minutes to 10 minutes
The best practices recommendations from our Professional 
Services group is to actively poll the hosts and services on a 
10 minute interval, so the default polling time has been 
updated accordingly in the default settings of the product.

--------------------
SECTION 3 - BEHAVIOR THAT HAS CHANGED IN VERSION 5.1.3
--------------------
-  TroubleView suppresses display of services on hosts that
are down
To avoid crowding the display and allow faster location of
problem hosts and services, the behavior of the TroubleView
has changed. Services in a non OK and non-pending state will
not be shown in the Troubled Services section of the display
if the hosts to which they are associated are down. Note
that this may result in the bar graph for Troubled Services
showing red and/or yellow for services in critical or
warning states, and yet none of these services may be
listed. This is by design.

Release Notes: 071907a	
GroundWork Open Source, Inc.